Smart India Hackathon 2025
Team Genesis- Gas Detection and Mapping underground using autonomous drone

1. This repository features a fully autonomous drone which works in a GPS denied environment, using LiDar 360 and Optical flow sensor (PMW3901). The application of this drone is Hazardous Gas Detection and Mapping in Underground Mines using gas detection, LiDar and Optical Flow sensors. Optical flow senors is used as a better alternative for sensing the objeects around our drone which helps our autonomous drone to move on the pass which is deemed possible by our path plannig algorithm.
2. The sensors consist of Optical FLow sensor (Object Detection)(PMW3901),IMU(Inertial Measurement Unit-For Acceleration and Gyro of drone)(Bosch BNO055),MQ-9 (For detecting CO and CH4),NDIR(Non-Dispersive Infrared Sensor-CO2)(SCD-40),AO-O2(For O2) and LiDar(Used for 3D mapping).
3. The drone works on a communication method known as "Breadcrumb Repeater" which is a device having it's own power source(LiPO) ,LoRa Radio module and STM32F401CCU6 inside which acts as a microcontroller and it oversees all the basic functions of repeater module. A threshold for signal strength is set to be at a certain dBm according to the terrain conditions. When the drone's signal strength falls below the set threshold, it will deploy a breadcrumb module which is treated as a payload. These breadcrumb modules forms a LoRa mesh network, through which the data is transmitted from drone to the nearest repeater and then it reaches the base station through efficient hopping of data packages over the repeater modules. A major advantage of this mesh system is that even if a repeater module stops working, the system is still intact and data can still get transmitted smoothly
4. We used Simulink by MATLAB to simulate our autonomous drone is the suitable environment. Then we incorporated the sensors - MQ9, NIDAR, AO-O2 and LiDar to do the gas detection and path mapping, we made changes in signal processing block to deploy this. Then for the drone to fly and avoid obstacle we made the Path planning algorithm using Stateflow and Simulink by giving all the necessary operations like takeoff, move forward, right left, return and landing. To get the outputs of the sensors as the data requirements we have used the scope blocks. Alternatively the autonomous drone can be simulated using MATLAB Simlink + Gazebo + ROS(Robot Opertaing System) in Ubuntu.
